INTRODUCTION


The two tracts here reprinted were written in English by Jean Paul Marat
during his residence in Church Street, Soho, where he practised as a
Physician.

Both of the tracts are exceedingly rare. Speaking of the former one, Mr.
Morse Stephens, in his article on “Marat” in the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_,[1] says, “no copy is to be found.” Since the date of Mr.
Stephens’s notice of Marat a copy has come to light, and is now in the
possession of Dr. J. F. Payne. Of the latter tract there is only one
known copy: this is in the Library of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical
Society of London. I have to thank the Council of the Society and Dr.
Payne for their kindness in allowing copies of the pamphlets to be made
for the purpose of publication.

The first tract is dedicated to the Worshipful Company of Surgeons in
London, and is dated November 1775. As the type is broken the day of the
month cannot be read with certainty in the copy from which this was
reprinted: there is no other known copy to which reference can be made.
The date is either the 21st or 24th: as regards the month and the year
there is no doubt. The second tract has an address to the Royal Society,
and is dated January 1st, 1776: as Marat returned to Paris in 1777 both
these works were issued towards the end of his residence in London.

A few months before the publication of the Essay on Gleets, Marat had
received an M.D. degree from the University of St. Andrews. The degree
was equivalent to an honorary one, and, as was the custom of the time,
was given on the recommendation of two medical men known to the Senate.
The two who recommended Marat were Hugh James and William Buchan,
doctors of medicine in Edinburgh. Marat passed no examination for the
degree, and probably did not even go to St. Andrews to receive it. At
that time it was customary to forward the Diploma on receipt of the
graduation fee. Mr. Morse Stephens[2] is of opinion that Marat received
degrees from other universities, because in 1777 on his appointment as
physician to the body-guard of the Comte d’Artois he is described as
“docteur en médecine de plusieurs facultés d’Angleterre.” It may,
however, be pointed out that at this date there were very few
universities or faculties granting an M.D. degree, and also that the
older universities did not give the Doctor of Medicine as an honorary
degree. It is known that Marat resided for some time at Edinburgh and at
Dublin, but there is no record of his having received a degree from
either of these Universities.

Although diligent search has been made by historians no record of any
other qualification has been found, and it may fairly be assumed that
the above description is an exaggeration of the St. Andrews degree.

There is evidence in both pamphlets that Marat practised medicine in
Paris before coming to London. In the Essay on Gleets[3] he speaks of
his “ten years practice”; this probably gives a clue to the actual date
of the beginning of his professional life. The duration of his practice
in France before his coming to England must have been short. He took up
his residence in England in 1766; the Essay is dated November 1775, and
Marat was born in 1742: allowing for the ten years he mentions, he would
have started practice about 1765, at which date he was twenty-three
years of age.

The “Gleet” Tract shows that Marat’s early work was not devoted entirely
to this department of practice. Mr. Morse Stephens[4] says, “from
Bordeaux he went to Paris, where he effected a remarkable cure of a
disease of the eyes, which had been abandoned as hopeless both by
physicians and quacks, by means of electricity.” This, no doubt, is the
case of _Charlotte Blondel_, described on page 34 of this reprint. Marat
himself says, speaking of the employment of bougies for the treatment of
gleet, “as it was not my province to treat venereal diseases, this
method had not engaged my attention.”

Marat evidently had in mind other medical works. In the Essay on
Gleets[5] he says, “If this essay should meet with approbation, I shall
offer to the public a new method of radically curing gonorrhœas in a
short time.” And again, in the tract on Diseases of the Eye,[6] speaking
of the action of mercury, “A complete Examination of them would swell
these Sheets beyond the proposed Size; I therefore reserve it for the
Subject of a future Publication.” It may, I think, be safely said that
these intentions were never carried out. Watt, in his _Bibliotheca
Britannica_, gives the titles of the two tracts here reprinted, but
makes no mention of the others; and, so far as I can find, they never
saw the light.

The _Daran_ under whose care the cases described in the first tract were
before they came under Marat’s observation, was Jacques Daran
[1701-1784], a man who greatly distinguished himself whilst in the army
during an epidemic of the Plague at Messina: after travelling all over
Europe he lived at Marseilles, but finally settled in Paris. He was
chiefly celebrated for his bougies for the treatment of diseases of the
urethra: the composition of the bougie he kept a secret, and thus
amassed a very large fortune. He ultimately, however, died at Paris in
very poor circumstances.

The famous _T_***, under whose care the case described on page 17
was, I cannot identify with any degree of certainty.

The “ingenious Mr. _Miller_, Oculist,” mentioned on page 44, was
probably John Miller, an optician, who died at Edinburgh in 1815, having
occupied for forty-eight years a leading position in that city. He was
originally in business at 7 Parliament Close, and afterwards was in
company as Miller and Adie in Nicolson Street.

The original tracts are printed in 4to without any running title; the
top of each page simply having the pagination in square brackets. The
reprints follow the originals exactly as regards orthography,
punctuation, etc. Obvious errors have not been corrected: the pamphlets
are reproduced exactly as Marat wrote them.

Marat’s nationality comes out very strongly in more than one passage,
where, whilst using English words, he has kept entirely to the French
idiom. In the preface to the first tract he apologises for his imperfect
knowledge of the language in which he is writing.

The tract on the Eye is printed with that prodigality of capitals so
common in books of that date: curiously enough the one on Gleets is
entirely free from this lavish use of capitals, and only has them where
absolutely necessary. There is no note (_b_) in the original of the
“Eye” tract: the letters have been followed exactly.

In the second tract the word “Gentlemen” both at the beginning and end
of the address to the Royal Society is in MS. The writing is undoubtedly
that of a foreigner: Mr. Stephens thinks that in all probability it is
in the handwriting of Marat himself,[7] and that this copy is the
presentation one. There being no other known copy it is impossible to
see if the words were added to the whole of the tracts issued for sale,
or whether they exist only in this copy. “Gentlemen” is printed in the
earlier tract, and it certainly looks as though it were an omission in
this case, not noticed until too late to have the word inserted in
print. If this were the “presentation copy,” its proper home would be at
the Royal Society, but there is no mark of its ever having belonged to
that Library.




                                  AN

                                 ESSAY

                                  ON

                                GLEETS;

                                WHEREIN

             The DEFECTS of the ACTUAL METHOD of treating
           those Complaints of the URETHRA are pointed out,

                                  AND

              An EFFECTUAL WAY of CURING them indicated.

                         By J. P. MARAT, M.D.

                                LONDON:

        Printed for W. NICOLL, in _St. Paul’s Church-Yard_, and
                    J. WILLIAMS, in _Fleet-Street_.

                      [Price ONE SHILLING Sewed.]




TO THE READER.


The candour of the public will need no solicitation, when acquainted of
the following sheets being written by a foreigner, not sufficiently
conversant in the language to avoid faults against it: which may
likewise be the more easily forgiven, for the fashioning of the stile
being less an object of attention, than the importance of matter to the
human health.




          _To the Worshipful Company of SURGEONS in LONDON._


     GENTLEMEN,

Long since Surgeons both in _London_ and _Paris_ have assumed to
themselves the treatment of Venereal Diseases, and Physicians generally
decline it.

I cannot conceive what makes it your exclusive province the treating of
those diseases, since in most cases the whole frame of the body is
affected, and in very few the hand of an operator is wanted. But as the
custom prevails, I do not pretend to strive against the torrent, and
content myself with offering to you the most effectual method of curing
Gleets--- a method which I at first discovered, by reflecting on the
deplorable situation of a bosom friend, and which I afterwards put in
practice at the earnest request of several acquaintances, and have ever
since followed with constant success.

       *       *       *       *       *

A man of mercenary principles would, no doubt, keep it a secret; but a
liberal mind is above such interested procedures. To promote the good of
society is the duty of all its members; besides, what an exquisite
pleasure it is for a benevolent heart to lessen, as much as possible,
the number of those unfortunate victims, who, without hope of relief,
labour under the many evils to which human nature is subject. Thus, not
satisfied with relieving the patients who apply to me, I wish I could
relieve many more by your hands. Happy, if in this respect, the fruit of
my labour is not lost!

                                                             GENTLEMEN,

                                     Your most obedient humble Servant,

                                                           J. P. MARAT.


_Church Street, Soho.

Nov. 21. 1775._




AN ESSAY ON GLEETS, &c.


I enter in the subject without any preamble.

A gleet, by the want of skill in those who undertake to cure venereal
diseases, is but too often the sad consequence[8] of a virulent
gonorrhœa.

The running is ever more or less coloured, often of a green tint, more
often of a pale yellow, and sometimes of a dark brown, a little blood
being mixed with it.

The matter discharged comes from the ulcerated glands of the internal
tunic of the urethra: but when the running suddenly increases, it always
proceeds, or from an inflammation of the muscular tunic, as happens
after too freely enjoying the bottle and the company of women, or from a
rarefaction of the fluids[9], caused by the expansion of the internal
air; as happens in spring and autumn, two seasons where the atmosphere,
being less elastic, does not oppose so great a resistance to the action
of the internal air.

Formerly the running was attributed to a relaxation of the affected
parts, an opinion still in credit among the ignorant; but by introducing
a probe in the urethra, every one may be convinced that it is wholly
caused by ulcers. _Daran_, who first made this discovery, attempted to
cure gleets by suppurative bougies. His method was soon adopted as the
most rational, and ever since followed by the best practitioners.
Undoubtedly it proved successful in many cases; but in many others
proved abortive, even in the hands of _Daran_ himself.

Long I had not seen bougies employed for curing gleets, without finding
them often ineffectual: however, as it was not my province to treat
venereal diseases, this method had not engaged my attention. Mere chance
afterwards obliged me to turn my thoughts to the subject, as I shall
now relate with the reader’s permission.

Calling one morning on an intimate friend of mine at _Paris_, I found
him involved in the deepest melancholy. On enquiring into the cause, he
acquainted me, that having been so long in the hands of _Daran_ for the
cure of a gleet, he at last thought himself free of it, when, on a
sudden, he was cruelly disappointed. Upon which he begged of me to give
him any advice in my power, his situation being extremely critical on
the point of marriage with a young lady of fortune whom he loved, and
with whom he could not bear the thought of engaging, while under so
cruel a circumstance. On this I said to him all that occurred to me just
then for his consolation.

After I had left him I could not help reflecting on his melancholy
condition, and thinking how possibly he could be extricated out of it.
The best way that offered to my mind was his cure.

I indeed considered suppuration as the only method to effect it. But not
accustomed indiscriminately to adopt a method as soon as it is extolled,
much less to follow it blindly, I enquired into the reasons of the
frequent inefficacy of the usual practice, and soon was made sensible of
them.

After mature consideration, I called upon my friend, and proposed to
attempt his cure. He readily agreed. The same day he took an apartment
next to mine. I immediately began his treatment, attended him closely,
and by suppuration properly conducted, was radically cured in seven
weeks.

Some months after, two of his acquaintances left incurable by _Daran_,
applied to me, requesting my assistance, and both were cured in eleven
weeks time. But here is not the place for enumerating cures performed by
my method; I therefore proceed to point out the defects of the actual
practice of preparing and using bougies to cure gleets, and shall
communicate the proper way to improve it, so as never to fail the
intention.

The actual method of treating gleets is frequently unsuccessful, because
defective.

The first defect is the hardiness of the suppurative, common bougies are
made with. This is obvious from the structure of the affected parts. The
internal tunic of the urethra, although ever irritated in a virulent
gonorrhœa, is seldom the seat of the disease. Its seat is commonly the
glandular tunic beneath the muscular, as is shewn by the abundance of
the suppuration, and more plainly by dissecting. In such case, it is
evident, that a common bougie introduced in the urethra, acting
immediately on the internal tunic alone, cannot cause but an imperfect
suppuration of the ulcerated parts, and consequently cannot perfect the
cure.

If so, when the ulcers of the glandular tunic lie at the entrance of the
lacunes in the internal tunic; how much more when the corroding virus
has extended its seat, and produced a kind of sinusses, as is always the
case in inveterate gleets!

Another defect in common bougies is a want of degradation in their
suppurative virtue.

It is well known, that practitioners employ but one kind of suppurating
bougies, made with a plaister, whose basis is lytargirium of lead and
oil of olives; whilst, in order to conduct suppuration properly, bougies
should be more or less suppurative, according to the stages of the
disease.

Having for a long while made use of suppurative bougies, practitioners
use dessicative ones, even when suppuration is still abundant. But to
those who have the least notion of the means employed by nature in the
reproduction of fleshy substance, it is evident, that such a sudden
passage from active suppurative remedies to dessicative ones, never can
produce the desired effect. After a forced suppuration, kept so for a
long while, far from being incarnated, the cavity of the ulcers is
widened, and all the fibres around it have lost their natural
elasticity.

Thus dissicative bougies employed immediately afterwards, being all of
an astringent quality, and acting on the part alone they are in contact
with, can only dry and crisp the edges of the ulcers, and cause them to
become callous. The running is therefore stopt for a time, and never
fails to break out again, when circulation is considerably increased by
any accidental cause.

The use of common bougies, as they are actually made, is not only
defective, but unrational and hurtful.

In common bougies, the suppurative plaister is spread over their whole
superficies. Now, to apply the remedy in every point of the urethra, in
order to cure some ulcerated parts, is certainly very absurd. What is
commonly alledged in support of such a practice is, that it is only by
giving to the medicament this extension, that it can be sure of reaching
and acting on the diseased parts; but the seat of the distemper can
easily be found, by gently introducing a probe into the urethra, and
there only may the remedy be applied.

Absurd did I say this method was; it would be well if it was no worse,
notwithstanding it is but too common for practitioners to assert each,
that bougies of his own making are not irritating; it is a fact, that as
being such only they can act, for without inflammation no suppuration is
to be expected. It is plain therefore, that the long standing
application of an irritating remedy over the whole membrane of the
urethra, must be attended with fatal consequences, such as crispation,
and afterwards relaxation of its fibres. How many patients have I not
heard, complaining of having nearly lost their virility by the use of
those bougies continued for some months. In several of them, I have even
seen the fibres of this membrane so corrugated, as that the præ-eminence
of the glands was retracted within, and this retraction was ever
accompanied with excruciating pains at the time of erections; however,
the most fatal consequences attending the actual practice of curing
gleets, is a permanent difficulty of making water. Dissicating bougies
being employed in order to consolidate the ulcers, never fail to dry to
an excess the parts they are in contact with; they therefore produce too
hard a cicatrice. This makes a more or less strong stricture in the
urethra, which always reduce the stream of the urine.

Pointing out the defects of the actual way of conducting suppuration, in
order to cure gleets, is in some sort indicating the proper way to do
it; but as there are many particulars to be observed in the effectual
method of curing those diseases, I shall lay down its whole process.

My first care is to inspect the parts. I take a bougie made of white
wax, rendered flexible with a little turpentine. I make round and smooth
one of its extremities, which I dip in the mucilage[10] of marshmallows,
and then I introduce it gently into the urethra up to the urine bladder,
carefully observing the parts where the patient feels any acute pain,
which parts I consider as the seat of the disease. Being thus made sure
where the ulcers are situated, I take another similar bougie, upon it I
mark places corresponding to the ulcers, there spread all round a little
of a suppurative plaister, which I make smooth, rolling it between the
fingers, anointed it with mucilage of marshmallows, and I introduce the
bougie in the urethra, when I judge that the remedy is in contact with
the ulcers, I bend back the external extremity of the bougie; and to
fasten it, nothing is wanting but to pinch it a little.

The suppurative I use at first is diachilum cum gummis, rendered softer
than usual; in order that being further dissolved by the natural heat,
it may penetrate into the cavity of the ulcers.

The space of time I continue using it, is proportionate to the
inveteracy of the disease; and to fix it between proper limits,
requires the skill of an able practitioner.

The caustic humours which an ulcer contains, vitiate the nutritive
lymph, and prevent its assimilation to the substance of the corroded
fibres; and besides adhering to these fibres, they keep them in a state
of rigidity, and oppose their extension. The first reason therefore,
showing the necessity of suppuration in order to cure ulcers, is to
evacuate these humours. The next is to dissolve the callous edges of the
ulcers, and to aid the corroded fibres to discharge the viscid fluids
with which they are filled.

Thus having used diachilum cum gummis, I employ four times a day
injections made with a weak solution[11] of sal ammoniac in common
water, and order the injection to be kept in the urethra five minutes
every time. Mean while I make use of a weaker suppurative, such as[12]
_l’onguent de la Mer_.

The time the injection and suppurative are to be continued, is likewise
to be proportionate to the inveteracy of the disease, and must be longer
if any astringent injection has been made use of, or any callous had
been discovered in the urethra by passing the probe up to it.

When the use of this suppurative is discontinued, I employ another made
with

        Gold lytharge        ? vj.
        Oil of olives        ? xji.
        Yellow wax           ? jv.
        Venet. turpentine    ? ji.
        Bol. Armœn           ? ji.

Every day I render it less suppurative by mixing with it a few drops of
Peruvian balsam, and continue its use till the ulcers are consolidated.

The space of time necessary to perfect the cure of slight gleets, is
generally from twenty-five to thirty days; and of stubborn ones, seldom
exceeds ten weeks.

But to these observations I must add a few others very material.

Sometimes patients who labour under these complaints, are of a habit of
body scorbutic, or infected with the venereal taint; in such cases the
humours ought to be purified, before the cure of the ulcers is
attempted.

If the patient is of a phlegmatic or plethoric habit of body, the ulcers
are always difficult to heal. A drachm of bark in powder should
therefore be prescribed to be taken in a glass of red wine, every day
during the treatment.

Such is my method of curing gleets; and if ten years practice attended
with constant success, may be allowed a sufficient time to convince of
its efficacy, I may confidently offer this my idea to the sensible
practitioners, and flatter myself that every one who shall adopt it,
will find the greatest satisfaction in this respect.

Among the great number of instances I could quote to evince its
superiority over all other methods hitherto in vogue, I confine myself
to the two following.

In 1762 _J. A._ Esq; contracted a virulent gonorrhœa at _Naples_. There
he applied to the famous _T_***. Having been some months in his
hands, without receiving any benefit, he went to Rome, where affairs of
importance called for his presence; and there likewise he was attended
for a long while by some reputed practitioner, but with no better
success.

From _Rome_ he went to _Florence_, where he was also under the hands of
the best surgeons.

Two years were already wasted in fruitless attempts, when the patient
set off for _Paris_, and there was for two years together under the care
of the celebrated _Daran_. During that time he underwent a long course
of remedies. The running indeed disappeared, when dissicative bougies
were made use of, but returned soon after.

A circumstance, however, which must appear strange at first sight is,
that the return of the flux was periodical. It regularly broke out every
year at the beginning of spring and autumn.

From _Paris_ the patient came over to _London_, his place of abode.
Anxious to be cured, he applied to an eminent surgeon, (whom it would
not be candid to name) who for eighteen months attended him with great
assiduity. Various were the remedies employed to subdue the running.
Among them the suppuration was again tried, and again did the running
stop by the use of dissicative bougies. When stopt the patient was
assured of his being cured, and to remove every doubt about it, was
advised to drink punch pretty freely. So he did; but no sooner was the
tryal made, than the running returned with greater violence. Vexed at so
many disappointments, the patient was determined to resign his fate to
Nature alone, and for a while did not alter his resolution, till hearing
(from a friend) of some striking cures of similar complaints I had
performed, that he might not have any reproach to make to himself, he
resolved to venture a last experiment.

When he applied[13] to me, his running was just coming upon him; it was
of a deep green, both scalding and abundant. The erection of the penis
was accompanied with excruciating pains, and the muscular tunic of the
urethra so crispated, that the extremity of the glands was retracted
inwards. The urine spouted out in a small stream, slowly and with
difficulty. Some time he experienced a sort of retention, and never
could eject it without passing a bougie in the neck of the bladder once
a day.

My first care was to relax the contracted parts; which I did by
mucilaginous injections. In a week’s time no pain was felt in erections;
the summit of the glands again became proeminous, and the scalding was
considerably abated.

Suspecting the whole mass of the lymph to be infected, as the patient
was rather of a plethoric complexion, I made him for a long while go
through a course of sudorific draughts.

When his humours were judged well purified, I employed suppurative
remedies, as I have explained before, and in about three months time the
ulcers were consolidated.

There are now nearly five years that this gentleman has found himself
perfectly cured. Ever since the difficulty[14] of making water has
diminished every day; and these eighteen months past he did not need the
introducing of a bougie in the neck of the bladder.

Such is the first case I was speaking of: the second is somewhat more
surprizing.

Mr. J. G. a celebrated artist,[15] having contracted a virulent
gonorrhœa at _Milan_, was for several months in the hands of a surgeon
in that town, and left uncured. From _Milan_ he went to _Spain_, and
there was the space of twenty-five years under the hands of all those
who had any repute for curing venereal diseases.

At first, all sorts of remedies were tried in turn, by every one of
them, and at last astringents rashly made use of to stop the running, in
order to have a pretence for payment.

The running once disappeared for eleven months, but returned, without
any apparent cause, more violently than ever; and ever since, till a few
years ago, broke out again after indulging too freely in drinking.

As the seat of the disease was the _fossa navicularis_, the urine was
always pretty free; but all the other cruel symptoms attending gleets
were felt.

Having laboured twenty-seven years under these complaints, and being
left incurable, the patient applied to me. His disease was so
inveterate, that I entertained indeed some doubts of his recovery: I
however ventured a fair tryal, and, to my great surprize, after he had
undergone a regular treatment for eleven weeks, he found himself
entirely cured; at least he has perceived, these two years past, no
appearance of a relapse, although he has indulged his bottle. And I may
boldly assert, that, the running being not possibly stopt by
suppuration, the ulcers are certainly healed, when they for a long space
of time furnish no matter.

I shall conclude with this observation, that, since a radical cure was
effected in the two forementioned cases, _there is no gleet incurable:
nay, there is none which cannot easily and speedily be cured if properly
treated_.
